% MYSCM-CLI(1) myscm-cli User Manuals
% Patryk Bęza
% August 4, 2017

# NAME

`myscm-cli` - client side of the mySCM application managing software and
configuration of the GNU/Linux workstations.

mySCM is simple Software Configuration Management (SCM) tool for managing
software and configuration of the clients running GNU/Linux distributions by
synchronizing server's reference configuration with clients' system
configuration.  This application is intended to apply system image created with
`myscm-srv` application which is `myscm-cli` counterpart.

# SYNOPSIS

myscm-cli.py [*options*] *action*

# DESCRIPTION

This is (yet another) Software Configuration Management (SCM) tool that allows
automation of distributing similarly configured software to multiple clients.
This solution of the software distribution problem significantly differs from
major existing solutions (e.g. Puppet, Chef, Ansible and Salt) in terms of how
it works and how it is intended to be used.  In contrast to existing solutions,
user running this application doesn't need to write complex configuration
rules, which describe in great detail the expected state of the client system.
Typical use case of using `myscm-srv` is as follows:

>  1. Scan freshly installed GNU/Linux reference system (a.k.a. server) with
>     `myscm-srv`'s application `--scan` option.  Every `--scan` creates new
>     directory with summary of the changes that occured on the reference
>     system since last `--scan` (see `--list-db` option).
>  1. Configure reference system in a way you want to configure clients'
>     systems.
>  1. Run `--scan` again to collect details of changes that you made since last
>     `--scan`.
>  1. Run `myscm-srv` with the `--gen-img` option that will create reference
>     system image which is `tar.gz` archive (a.k.a. mySCM *system image*)
>     which will be later applied by the clients using `myscm-cli` (which is
>     `myscm-srv` counterpart).
>  1. Copy mySCM system image to the client's system.
>  1. Apply mySCM reference system image by running `myscm-cli` application
>     with the `--apply-img` option.

This application is briefly referred as a `client`.  Functionality of the
client-side of the mySCM application boils down to applying so-called
*configuration images* or *system images* which are bundles of configuration
changes done on the server machine, gathered together and archived by the
`myscm-srv` application.  All the changes done in the client's system
configuration are described within mySCM system image created with `--gen-img`
option of the `myscm-srv` application.  Besides applying configuration changes,
`myscm-cli` application is able to download configuration images from peers
(which are typically other clients) and verify both authenticity of the mySCM
system image by verifying its SSL digital signature and its logical
consistency.  `myscm-cli` is able to download mySCM system image from other
host using e.g. SFTP protocol using credentials provided in configuration
file.

# OPTIONS

Most of the below listed options have their counterparts in the `myscm-srv`
configuration file stored in `/etc/myscm-cli/config.ini`.  If option is present
both in configuration file and as a command line argument, then command line
argument takes precedence.  Some of the options have their default fallback
value even if they are not specified neither in configuration file nor as
command line option.

-c *FILE*, \--config=*FILE*
:   Read `myscm-cli` configuration from specified *FILE* instead of default
    `/etc/myscm-cli/config.ini` file.  This file determines e.g. logging
    options, SSL certificate path that is used to verify digital SSL signature
    of the mySCM system image and more.

\--force
:   Take default actions and don't ask interactive questions (e.g. while
    running `--apply-img` option).

-l, \--list
:   List all locally available mySCM system images created with `myscm-srv
    --gen-img` and print information whether they have respective verified SSL
    digital signatures.  Signatures need to be placed in the same dictinary as
    mySCM system images to be recognized (by default in
    '/var/lib/myscm-cli/downloaded').

\--print-ver
:   Print recently applied mySCM system image version, ie. print current mySCM
    system version.  If no image was applied yet, then -1 is printed.  mySCM
    system image version is referred in mySCM system image filename,
    e.g. `myscm-img.1.2.tar.gz` system image is intended to be applied on the
    system that is in state *1* and is going to be upgraded to state *2*.

-p *PROTO*, \--protocol=*PROTO*
:   Select protocol that is preferred to be used to download newest mySCM
    system image generated by the `myscm-srv` with `--gen-img` option.  mySCM
    system images are downloaded either from `HOST` provided by `--update`
    option or from randomly selected host from `PeersList` variable read from
    configuration file.  If `HOST` argument was not provided with `--update`
    option, then this option is intended to filter out `PeersList`, so that
    only peer with protocol *PROTO* can be randomly selected.  If randomly
    selected host doesn't have applicable mySCM system image, then next peer is
    randomly selected until there are no peers left.  This option makes sense
    only with `--update` and `--upgrade` options.  Currently the only accepted
    protocol is *SFTP*, thus this option is kind of a proof of concept for
    future realeses.

\--ssl-cert=*PATH*
:   Full *PATH* to the server's SSL certificate that is being used to verify
    signature of the system image generated by the `myscm-srv` (default value:
    '/etc/ssl/private/myscm-cli.sig').

\--ssl-pubkey=*PATH*
:   Full *PATH* to the server's public key of the SSL certificate that is being
    used to verify signature of the mySCM system image generated with the
    `myscm-srv` `--gen-img` option.

# ACTIONS

\--apply-img=*SYS_IMG_VER*
:   Apply changes to the client's system effectively upgrading it to the system
    state identified by unique *SYS_IMG_VER* identifier.  Applied mySCM system
    image is read from `myscm-img.A.B.tar.gz` file where `B` is *SYS_IMG_VER*
    and `A` is integer representing current state of the system which can be
    obtained by running application with `--print-ver` option.

\--update=[*HOST*]
:   Update mySCM system image by downloading it from *HOST* (which can be
    peer's IP or hostname) or, if *HOST* is not specified, from randomly chosen
    client from *PeersList* variable read from configuration file.  Connection
    is being established using protocol defined by `--protocol` option or by
    configuration file if `--protocol` option is not present.  Downloaded file
    is saved in `/var/myscm-cli/myscm-img.A.B.tar.gz` where `A` and `B` are
    non-negative integers referring to the current and target system version
    respectively.

\--upgrade=[*SYS_IMG_VER*]
:   Equivalent of running `--update` and then `--apply-img` *SYS_IMG_VER*
    option.  If *SYS_IMG_VER* is not given then recently downloaded mySCM
    system image is applied.

-k, \--config-check
:   Check if application configuration is valid.  If it's valid, then exit
    status is `0` (see `$?` variable) and `Config OK` message is printed on
    `stdout`.  Otherwise exit status is `1` and no message is printed.

\--verify *SIGNATURE_PATH* *SIGNED_PATH*
:   Verify given SSL signature *SIGNATURE_PATH* of the given file
    *SIGNED_PATH*.

\--verify-img=*PATH*
:   Verify signature of the given *PATH* system image.  SSL signature is
    assumed to be present in the same directory as *PATH* and have the same
    filename as *PATH* with '.sig' suffix appended.

-v, \--verbose
:   Increase output and log verbosity.  Default value is `0`.

-h, \--help
:   Show help message (which is short version of this manual page) and exit.

\--version
:   Print version information and exit.

# EXIT STATUS

If no error occurred the exit status is `0`.  Otherwise `1` is returned.

# COPYRIGHT

Copyright © 2017 Patryk Bęza  
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.  
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.  
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.

# BUGS

Email bug reports to the bug-reporting address <bezap@student.mini.pw.edu.pl>.
For now, no bug tracker is available.

# SEE ALSO

`myscm-srv` (1).

You can learn more details about mySCM software from project white paper.  The
`myscm-cli` source code and all documentation may be published in the future in
project's GitHub repository <https://github.com/pbeza/myscm> or elsewhere.

# NOTES

This software is part of the master thesis project.  To learn more about this
implementation, please refer to the project white paper.
